1||7

The Role of Biodegradable

Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering

Ghassem Amoabediny1,2, Nasim Salehi-Nik1,2 and Bentolhoda Heli1,2

1Department of Biomedical Engineering, Research Centre for New Technologies in Life

Science Engineering, University of Tehran,

2Department of Chemical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, University of Tehran,

Iran

1. Introduction

Tissue engineering is fundamentally described as the generation of three- dimensional (3D)

artificial tissues. Its consequential task is to regenerate human tissue or to develop cell-based

substitutes in order to restore, reconstruct or improve tissue functions (Pörtner et al., 2005;

Ellis, 2005). Proper processing of biological and mechanical functionality is monumental for

tissue engineered structures, the ones which are not mainly sufficient enough yet. Acquiring

the solution for this problem demands intensive researches and studies in every aspects and
1||tissue engineered structures, the ones which are not mainly sufficient enough yet. Acquiring

the solution for this problem demands intensive researches and studies in every aspects and

steps of TE (Sengers et al., 2007). As a matter of fact, creating a functional tissue requires

efficient growth of various types of cells on a 3D scaffolds and the bulk production of one

cell seems not to be adequate (Ellis et al., 2005).

The principal function of a scaffold is to direct cell behavior such as migration, proliferation,

differentiation, maintenance of phenotype, and apoptosis by facilitating sensing and

responding to the environment via cell–matrix and cell–cell communications (Tabesh et al.,

2009). Therefore, having such abilities provides scaffolds seeded with a special type of cell as

an important part of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. The scaffold design and

fabrication are major areas of biomaterial research, since biomaterial scaffold can create
1||an important part of tissue engineering and regenerative medicine. The scaffold design and

fabrication are major areas of biomaterial research, since biomaterial scaffold can create

substrate within which cells are instructed to form a tissue or an organ in a highly controlled

way. In this chapter, it is tried to provide an inclusive survey of biopolymers to be used as

scaffolds for tissue engineering, fabrication methods and engineering challenges such as

mass transfer and mechanical strength. In the proceeding, these factors are reviewed in

vascular and nerve systems.

2. Scaffold considerations

2.1 Requirements of appropriate scaffold materials for tissue engineering

Scaffold design and fabrication are major areas of biomaterial research and they are also

important areas for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine research. Scaffold

provides the necessary support for cells to proliferate and maintain their differentiated
1||important areas for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine research. Scaffold

provides the necessary support for cells to proliferate and maintain their differentiated

functions, and its architecture defines the ultimate shape of a new organ.

An ideal scaffold should possess the following characteristics to bring about the desired

biological response (1) the scaffold should possess inter-connecting pores of appropriate

154 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

scale to favor tissue integration and vascularization, (2) be made from material with

controlled biodegradability or bio-resorbability, (3) appropriate surface chemistry to favor

cellular attachment, differentiation and proliferation, (4) possess adequate mechanical

properties to match the intended site of implantation and handling, (5) should not induce

any adverse response and, (6) be easily fabricated into a variety of shapes and sizes (Liu et

al., 2007; Sachlos et al., 2003).
1||any adverse response and, (6) be easily fabricated into a variety of shapes and sizes (Liu et

al., 2007; Sachlos et al., 2003).

Due to control scaffold degradation and mechanical integrity, cell-scaffold interaction as

well as cell functon, one must have access to a range of materials. Therefore, an appropriate

fabrication method is required with which it is possible to have a structure with different

independent parameters and materials (Yarlagadda et al., 2005).

It is worth to mention that degradation of synthetic polymers, both in vitro and in vivo

conditions, releases by-products. For example, for PLLA releasing Lactic acid during

degradation, causes reducing the pH, which further accelerates the degradation rate due to

autocatalysis which later affects cellular function. (Sachlos & Czernuszka, 2003, as cited

Reed and Gilding, 1981)

In addition to degradation rate and by-products, certain physical characteristics of the
1||Reed and Gilding, 1981)

In addition to degradation rate and by-products, certain physical characteristics of the

scaffolds must be considered when designing a substrate to be used in tissue engineering

applications. For instance, in order to allow proper cell attachment, the scaffold must have a

large surface area which can be achieved by creating a highly porous polymeric foam. In

these foams, the pore size should be large enough to allow cells to penetrate through the

pores, to maximize nutrient and oxygen diffusion, interstitial fluid and blood flow into the

interior of the scaffold, to manipulate tissue differentiation (Yarlagadda et al., 2005, as cited

Le Huec et al. 1995; Tsuruga et al., 1997). These characteristics (porosity and pore size) often

depend on the material and method of scaffold fabrication (Mikos&Temenoff, 2000, as cited

Mooney et al., 1999; Nam et al. 2000)

2.2 Decent materials for scaffolds fabrication
1||depend on the material and method of scaffold fabrication (Mikos&Temenoff, 2000, as cited

Mooney et al., 1999; Nam et al. 2000)

2.2 Decent materials for scaffolds fabrication

In order to have an effective function, an ideal scaffold must possess the optimum structural

parameters, conductivity to the cellular activities leading to neo-tissue formation; these

include cell penetration and migration into the scaffold, cell attachment onto the scaffold

substrate, cell spreading and proliferation and cell orientation. Such scaffold design

parameters are now described with reference to these cellular activities. One of the first

considerations when designing a scaffold for tissue engineering is the choice of material.

The three main material types which have been successfully investigated to be applied in

developing scaffolds include (i) natural polymers, (ii) synthetic polymers, and (iii) ceramics

(Willerth & Sakayama-Elbert, 2007; Radulescu et al., 2007).
1||developing scaffolds include (i) natural polymers, (ii) synthetic polymers, and (iii) ceramics

(Willerth & Sakayama-Elbert, 2007; Radulescu et al., 2007).

2.2.1 Natural materials

Natural polymers commonly derived from protein or carbohydrate polymers have been

used as scaffolds for the growth of several tissue types. In the area of tissue engineering, for

example, scientists and engineers look for scaffolds on which it may successfully grow cells

to replace damaged tissue. Typically, it is desirable for these scaffolds to be: biodegradable,

non-toxic/non-inflammatory, mechanically similar to the tissue to be replaced, highly

porous, encouragement of cell attachment and growth, easy and cheap to manufacture, and

capable of attaching with other molecules (Elmstedt, 2006; Cuy, 2004). Here some examples

of natural polymers that have been previously studied for biomaterials application are

reviewed.

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 155
1||of natural polymers that have been previously studied for biomaterials application are

reviewed.

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 155

- Collagen

Collagen is considered by many scientists as an ideal scaffold or matrix for tissue

engineering as it is the major protein component of the extracellular matrix. It provides

support to connective tissues such as skin, tendons, bones, cartilage, blood vessels, and

ligaments in its native environment, and also interacts with cells in connective tissues and

transduces essential signals for the regulation of cell anchorage, migration, proliferation,

differentiation, and survival. Collagen is defined by high mechanical strength, good

biocompatibility, low antigenicity and ability of being cross-linked, and tailored for its

mechanical degradation and water uptake properties; Twenty-seven types of collagens have
1||biocompatibility, low antigenicity and ability of being cross-linked, and tailored for its

mechanical degradation and water uptake properties; Twenty-seven types of collagens have

been identified so far, but collagen type I is the most abundant and the most investigated for

biomedical applications (Chunlin et al., 2004).

Collagen may also be processed into a variety of formats including porous sponges, gels,

and sheets. It can be cross-linked with chemicals to make it stronger or to alter its

degradation rate (Cuy, 2004). However, for medical applications, the implantation of foreign

cells causes immunological problems. Collagen has potential uses as follows (Matin, 2004):

- Collagen gel matrix maintains its shape following cell seeding and culture,

- Highly permeable bio-scaffold design,

- Production of tissue implants for reconstructive/cosmetic surgery applications, and

- Generation of spinal cord repair implants.

- Chitosan
1||- Highly permeable bio-scaffold design,

- Production of tissue implants for reconstructive/cosmetic surgery applications, and

- Generation of spinal cord repair implants.

- Chitosan

Chitosan is a cationic polymer obtained from chitin comprising copolymers of β (1→4)-

glucosamine and N-acetyl- D-glucosamine. Chitin is a natural polysaccharide found

particularly in the shell of crustacean, cuticles of insects and cell walls of fungi and is the

second most abundant polymerized carbon found in nature (Khor & Lim, 2003).

This polymer has many suitable properties. It can be used for wound dressing, drug

delivery, and tissue engineering (cartilage, nerve and liver tissue) applications. These

properties include: (Willerth et al., 2007):

- Minimal foreign body reaction,

- Mild processing conditions (synthetic polymers often need to be dissolved in harsh

chemicals; chitosan will dissolve in water based on pH),
1||- Minimal foreign body reaction,

- Mild processing conditions (synthetic polymers often need to be dissolved in harsh

chemicals; chitosan will dissolve in water based on pH),

- Controllable mechanical/biodegradation properties (such as scaffold porosity or

polymer length), and

- Availability of chemical side groups for attachment to other molecules.

Chitosan has already been investigated for adoption in the engineering of cartilage, nerve,

and liver tissue. Current difficulties applying chitosan as a polymer scaffold in tissue

engineering include low strength and inconsistent behavior with seeded cells (Madihally

and Matthew, 1999). Fortunately, chitosan may be easily combined with other materials in

order to increase its strength and cell-attachment potential. Mixtures with synthetic

polymers such as poly (vinyl alcohol) and poly (ethylene glycol), or natural polymers such

as collagen, have already been produced. These combinations promise improving the
1||polymers such as poly (vinyl alcohol) and poly (ethylene glycol), or natural polymers such

as collagen, have already been produced. These combinations promise improving the

performance of the combined construct over the behavior of either component alone (Cuy,

2004).

- Agarose/alginate

Agarose and alginate are linear polysaccharides obtained from seaweed and algae,

respectively. Both polygosaccharides must undergo extensive purification to prevent

immune responses after implantation (Willerth et al., 2007). Moreover, encapsulation of

certain cell types into alginate beads may actually enhance cell survival and growth. In

156 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

addition, alginate has been explored to function in liver, nerve, heart, and cartilage tissue

engineering.

Unfortunately some drawbacks to alginate include mechanical weakness and poor cell

adhesion. In order to overcome these limitations, the strength and cell behavior of alginate
1||engineering.

Unfortunately some drawbacks to alginate include mechanical weakness and poor cell

adhesion. In order to overcome these limitations, the strength and cell behavior of alginate

have been enhanced by mixtures with other materials, including the natural polymers

agarose and Chitosan (Cuy, 2004). Mohan et al. described the preparation and

characterization of alginate sponges to be used as scaffolds in tissue engineering. They

fabricated highly porous 3D scaffolds from cheaply available sodium alginate, which

exhibits good biocompatibility. The scaffold fabricated by a combination of freeze drying

and particulate leaching, showed increased porosity and pore size. Better pore

characteristics and swelling properties may permit more cell invasion and nutrient supply.

Moreover alginate is thermally stable, non-cytotoxic and biodegradable (Mohan and Nair,

2005).

- Fibronectin
1||Moreover alginate is thermally stable, non-cytotoxic and biodegradable (Mohan and Nair,

2005).

- Fibronectin

Fibronectin (FN) is a glycoprotein which exists outside cells and on the cell surface. It also

exists in blood, other body fluids and on the cell surfaces of connective tissue. This protein

associates with the other proteins of the extra cellular matrix (ECM) like fibrinogen,

collagen, glycosaminoglycans and with suitable receptors which are in the cell membrane

(Ebner et al., 2006). Fibronectin is composed of tandem repeats of three distinct types (I, II

and III) of individually folded modules.

2.2.2 Synthetic materials

Synthetic polymers have been widely used for over 20 years as surgical sutures, with long

established clinical success and many are approved for human use by the Food and Drug

Administration (FDA). The polymers which approved by FDA are as follows: PCL, PLLA,

PLGA, PEG and PGA.
1||established clinical success and many are approved for human use by the Food and Drug

Administration (FDA). The polymers which approved by FDA are as follows: PCL, PLLA,

PLGA, PEG and PGA.

However current synthetic polymers do not possess a surface chemistry which is familiar to

cells, that in vivo thrive on an extracellular matrix made mostly of collagen, elastin,

glycoproteins, proteoglycans, laminin and fibronectin; these materials have many

advantages to be used as scaffolds (Sachlos & Czernuszka, 2003, as cited Alberts et al., 1994).

These polymers can be tailored to produce a wide range of mechanical properties and

degradation rates. Synthetic polymers also represent a more reliable source of raw materials

with the ability to provoke an immune response in body. Finally synthetic polymers can be

react together to combine their unique properties (Willerth et al., 2007; Manzanedo, 2005).
1||with the ability to provoke an immune response in body. Finally synthetic polymers can be

react together to combine their unique properties (Willerth et al., 2007; Manzanedo, 2005).

Here some of these synthetic polymers used in tissue engineering are described briefly.

- Poly (D, L- lactic acid)

Poly lactic acid (PLA) is a biodegradable polyester attainable by poly-condensation of lactic

acid, and amonomeric precursor that can be obtained from renewable resources. Lactic acid

is a chiral molecule available in the L and D stereoisomer forms. L-lactic acid occurs in the

metabolism of all animals and microorganism, and thus is an absolutely non-toxic

degradation product of polylactides. This is proved by the successful application of

polylactides as a resorbable medical structure over a period of three decades (kricheldorf,

2001; Onose, 2008).

Since this polymer has biodegradability, biocompatibility, good mechanical properties, and
1||2001; Onose, 2008).

Since this polymer has biodegradability, biocompatibility, good mechanical properties, and

ability to be dissolved in common solvents for processing, it has been successfully employed

as matrixes for cell transplantation and tissue regenerations (Kim et al., 2003).

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 157

- Poly (lactic-co- glycolic acid)

Poly (glycolic acid) (PGA) and poly (lactic acid) (PLA) are biodegradable synthetic

polymers, which can react to form the copolymer poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA). PGA

is highly crystalline and has a high melting point and low solubility in organic solvents. An

intensive investigation aimed at the improvement of PGA properties was undertaken by

many researchers, focusing on the preparation of PGA copolymers with more hydrophilic

PLA.

After implantation, the ester bonds that make up the backbone of the polymer can be
1||many researchers, focusing on the preparation of PGA copolymers with more hydrophilic

PLA.

After implantation, the ester bonds that make up the backbone of the polymer can be

hydrolyzed, causing the scaffold to degrade into metabolite by-products. These by-products

can be absorbed by the body and may cause pH changes around the implantation site. The

degradation rate of the scaffolds can be altered by varying the ratio of PGA to PLA in the

scaffold.

The presence of an extra methyl group renders lactic acid more hydrophobic. The

hydrophobicity of PLA limits the water uptake of films to 2%, and decreases the backbone

hydrolysis rate in respect to the one of the PGA homopolymer. Moreover, PLA is more

soluble in organic solvents than in PGA. It is important to note that no linear relationship

exists between the ratio of glycolic acid to lactic acid and the physico-mechanical properties

of their regarding copolymers. The high crystallinity of PGA is rapidly lost in PGA/PLA
1||exists between the ratio of glycolic acid to lactic acid and the physico-mechanical properties

of their regarding copolymers. The high crystallinity of PGA is rapidly lost in PGA/PLA

copolymers. These morphological changes lead to an increase in the hydration and

hydrolysis rate and copolymers tend to degrade more rapidly than the homopolymers of

PGA or PLA do (Reed et al., 1981).

- Poly-β-hydroxybutyrate

Poly-β-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) is a linear head-to-tail homopolymer of (R)-β hydroxybutiric

acid, which forms crystalline cytoplasmic granules in the wide variety of bacteria. This

material is biodegradable and biocompatible microbially produced polyester, which after

implantation degrades slowly at body temperature and forms a non-toxic metabolite that is

secreted in urine (Mosahebi et al., 2001). PHB has been previously used as a wound

scaffolding device, designed to support and protect a wound against further damage while
1||secreted in urine (Mosahebi et al., 2001). PHB has been previously used as a wound

scaffolding device, designed to support and protect a wound against further damage while

promoting healing by encouraging cellular growth on and within the device from the

wound surface (Ljungberg et al., 1999).

- Poly-e-caprolactone

Poly-e-caprolactone(PCL), an aliphatic polyester which is bioresorbable and biocompatible,

is generally used in pharmaceutical products and wound dressings (Venugopal et al., 2005).

This polymer has low melting point of around 60°C and a glass transition temperature of

about −60°C. PCL is degraded by hydrolysis of its ester linkages in physiological conditions

(e.g. in the human body) and therefore, has received a great deal of attention for use as an

implantable biomaterial (Schnell et al., 2007).

- Poly (ethylene glycol)

Poly ethylene glycol (PEG), also known as poly ethylene oxide (PEO) or polyoxyethylene
1||implantable biomaterial (Schnell et al., 2007).

- Poly (ethylene glycol)

Poly ethylene glycol (PEG), also known as poly ethylene oxide (PEO) or polyoxyethylene

(POE) is the most commercially important polyethers, which refers to an oligomer or polymer

of ethylene oxide resisting protein adsorption and cell adhesion. These characteristics help

minimize the immune response after implantation. Additionally, this polymer can also help to

seal cell membranes after injury, making it useful for limiting cell death. Hydrophilic PEG

hydrogels can be made through a variety of cross- linking schemes to create scaffolds with

varying degradation as well as release rates. Further chemistry can be used to modify these

gels to add sites for cell adhesion or extracellular matrix (ECM) molecules to allow cells to

infiltrate into these scaffolds, extending their potential applications (Willerth et al., 2007).

158 Biomaterials Science and Engineering
1||infiltrate into these scaffolds, extending their potential applications (Willerth et al., 2007).

158 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

PEG can be photo-polymerized under mild conditions in the presence of cells to create a

hydrogel that is biocompatible and non-toxic. Bioactive molecules such as cell adhesion

ligands, growth factors and proteolytic degradation sites have been previously incorporated

into PEG hydrogels and shown to influence adhesion, proliferation, migration, and

extracellular matrix production of vascular smooth muscle cells.

- Poly (glycerol sebacic acid)

Poly glycerol sebacic acid (PGS), also called bio-rubber, is a tough, biodegradable elastomer

made from biocompatible monomers. Its main features are good mechanical properties,

rubber like elasticity and surface erosion biodegradation. PGS was proved to have similar in

vitro and in vivo biocompatibility to PLGA, a widely used biodegradable polymer.

(Manzanedo, 2005; Sundback et al., 2005).
1||vitro and in vivo biocompatibility to PLGA, a widely used biodegradable polymer.

(Manzanedo, 2005; Sundback et al., 2005).

- Poly (2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate)

Hydroxyethyl methacrylate (HEMA) is a hydro-soluble monomer, which can be

polymerized (under various circumstances) at low temperatures (from -20°C to +10°C). It

can be used to prepare various hydrogels and to immobilize proteins or cells. It is widely

used in medicine as an appropriate biomaterial. Poly (2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate)

(pHEMA) is particularly attractive for biomedical engineering applications. Because of its

physical properties and high biocompatibility, this polymer can be easily manipulated

through formulated chemistry has been extensively used in medical applications, e.g.

contact lenses, kerato prostheses and orbital implants. Furthermore, a pHEMA scaffold

could be easily incorporated into the nerve guidance tubes (Flynn et al., 2003).

2.3 Methods used for scaffolds design
1||could be easily incorporated into the nerve guidance tubes (Flynn et al., 2003).

2.3 Methods used for scaffolds design

Several techniques have been developed to process synthetic and natural scaffold materials

into porous structures. These conventional scaffold fabrication techniques are considered as

processes that create scaffolds having a continuous, uninterrupted pore structure. An

overview of such different techniques is as follows: Electrospinning, Solvent-casting,

particulate-leaching, Gas foaming, Fiber meshes/fiber bonding, Phase separation, Melt

molding, Emulsion freeze drying, Solution casting and Freeze drying (Mikos& Temenoff,

2003; Sachlos & Czernuszka, 2003).

2.3.1 Electrospinning

Electrospinning is a technique for nano-fibrous scaffold fabrication. Various synthetic or

natural polymers can be spun to nano fibers with diameters in nano - to micrometer range.

They are characterized by a high surface to volume ratio and thus offer sample substrate for
1||natural polymers can be spun to nano fibers with diameters in nano - to micrometer range.

They are characterized by a high surface to volume ratio and thus offer sample substrate for

cell attachment.

In this technique, polymers are dissolved into a proper solvent or melted before being

subjected to a very high voltage to overcome the surface tension and viscoelastic forces as

well as forming different fibers (50 nm - 30 µm) diameters, which feature a morphologic

similarity to the extracellular matrix of natural tissue and effective mechanical properties.

These nanofibrous scaffolds can be utilized to provide a better environment for cell

attachment, migration, proliferation and differentiation when compared with traditional

scaffolds (Martins et al., 2007).

In general, the process of electrospinning is mainly affected by (i) system parameters, such as

polymer molecular weight, molecular weight distribution and solution properties (e.g.
1||In general, the process of electrospinning is mainly affected by (i) system parameters, such as

polymer molecular weight, molecular weight distribution and solution properties (e.g.

viscosity, surface tension, conductivity); and (ii) process parameters, such as flow rate, electric

potential, distance between capillary and collector, motion of collector, etc (Yang et al., 2005).

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 159

A study on the fabrication of a scaffold by electrospinning biomaterials such as poly lactic

acid (PLA), poly glycolic acid (PGA), poly (ethylene-co- vinyl acetate) (PEVA), and type-I

collagen was reported (Bowlin et al., 2001). Moreover, nanostructured electrospun PLGA

membranes for anti-adhesion applications were presented (Fang et al., 2001).

Electrospinning can even be used to create biocompatible thin films with useful coating

designs and surface structures that can be deposited on implantable devices in order to
1||Electrospinning can even be used to create biocompatible thin films with useful coating

designs and surface structures that can be deposited on implantable devices in order to

facilitate the integration of these devices with the body (Buchko et al., 1999).

The collagen nanofibers were characterized by a wide range of pore size distribution, high

porosity, excellent mechanical strength and high surface area to volume ratios, which are

favorable parameters for cell attachment, growth and proliferation. In cell activity

assessment, electrospun collagen nanofibers coated with type I collagen or laminin were

found to promote cell adhesion and spread of normal human keratinocytes. This may be a

consequence of the high surface area available for cell attachment due to their three-

dimensional features and restoration of biological and structural properties of natural ECM

proteins (Rho et al., 2006).

2.3.2 Freeze-drying
1||dimensional features and restoration of biological and structural properties of natural ECM

proteins (Rho et al., 2006).

2.3.2 Freeze-drying

Many of the fabrication technologies for polymers are based on particulate-leaching

techniques, heat compression, and extrusion. However, the harsh operating conditions of

these processes may limit the incorporation of bioactive proteins, cells and residual amounts

of the chemical solvents required may cause toxicity in vivo. Freeze-drying is an alternative

method to produce porous scaffolds, which do not require additional chemicals relying on

the water.

This method, used in hydrogels, forms ice crystals that can be sublimated from the polymer,

creating a particular micro-architecture. Because the direction of growth and size of the ice

crystals are a function of the temperature gradient, linear, radial, and/or random pore

directions and diverse sizes can be produced with this methodology (Stokols et al., 2004).
1||crystals are a function of the temperature gradient, linear, radial, and/or random pore

directions and diverse sizes can be produced with this methodology (Stokols et al., 2004).

On the other hand, the pore size can be controlled by the freezing rate and pH; a fast

freezing rate produces smaller pores (Sachlos et al., 2003).

2.3.3 Molding

Graft implants manufacture is an extraordinary example of micro-architecture. One possible

way of making the grafts is the particulate leaching technique (i.e. molding). A mold is

made of a medium that may not contaminate the graft and that may melt off at a lower

temperature melt point than that of the graft. Already widely used, this method limits

design intricacy because heat stress during formation compromises the composition of the

graft (Friedman et al., 2002). Another problem with this method is that it would be difficult

to make a mold small enough for small animal research. As an example, Moore et al. used
1||graft (Friedman et al., 2002). Another problem with this method is that it would be difficult

to make a mold small enough for small animal research. As an example, Moore et al. used

Poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) with copolymer ratio 85:15 for their initial experiments.

Injection molding with rapid solvent evaporation resulted in scaffolds with a plurality of

distinct channels running parallel along the length of the scaffolds (Moore et al., 2006).

2.3.4 Solid free form fabrication

The most promising production method is called solid free-form fabrication (SFF). This

approach uses a machine like an inkjet printer to make the graft one layer at time by

“printing” one layer on top of the other (Friedman et al., 2002). However, the main problem

160 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

with this technology is the extremely high cost. The machines have to be permanently

modified from their original function. Through these methods one can manage pore size,
1||with this technology is the extremely high cost. The machines have to be permanently

modified from their original function. Through these methods one can manage pore size,

porosity and pore distribution to produce structures to increase the mass transport of

oxygen and nutrients throughout the scaffold.

Although there are several commercial variants of SFF technology, the general process

involves producing a computer-generated model using computer-aided design (CAD)

software. After expression of cross- sectional layers, data is implemented to the SFF machine

to produce the physical model. Through building the layers from bottom to up, each newly

formed layer adheres to the previous. Post-processing may be required to remove

temporary support structures (Sachlos & Czernuszka, 2003). The methods that use the SSF

technologies to fabricate tissue engineering scaffold are: (1) stereolithography (SLA), (2)
1||temporary support structures (Sachlos & Czernuszka, 2003). The methods that use the SSF

technologies to fabricate tissue engineering scaffold are: (1) stereolithography (SLA), (2)

selective laser sintering (SLS), (3) fused deposition modelling (FDM) and (4) three-

dimensional printing (3-DP).

3. Challenges in engineering scaffolds

The major hindrance through tissue engineering constructs is mass transfer. Since scaffolds

provide large surface area to volume ratios, it is proved that mass transfer limitation is

reduced. Pore interconnectivity directly influences the mass transfer (e.g. oxygen and

nutrient supply and removal of toxic metabolites).

During tissue regeneration, permeability of the matrix decreases due to the declined pore

size. In addition, the size of most engineered tissues is limited as they do not have their own

blood system, and the cells are only supplied by diffusion (Griffith & Naughton, 2002;
1||size. In addition, the size of most engineered tissues is limited as they do not have their own

blood system, and the cells are only supplied by diffusion (Griffith & Naughton, 2002;

Kannan et al., 2005). Meanwhile, as only cell layers of 100–200 μm thickness can absorb O

2

by diffusion, oxygen supply is particularly a critical issue. However, since tissue

constructions should have larger dimensions, mass transfer limitation can be considered as

one of the greatest engineering challenges (Pörtner et al., 2005).

The next challenge is mechanical effect on cells in dynamic systems. Under flow conditions,

flow rate needs to be optimized based on (i) nutrient distribution, (ii) effect on assembly of

matrix elements and (iii) cellular response to local shear stress (Lawrence et al., 2009). The

scaffold architecture affects the local fluid flow velocities of the cell suspension which

influences the number of cell-scaffold contacts per time unit and the local cell deposition
1||scaffold architecture affects the local fluid flow velocities of the cell suspension which

influences the number of cell-scaffold contacts per time unit and the local cell deposition

rates. By changing the scaffolds design, different flow profiles and cell distributions in the

scaffolds may be obtained (Melchels et al., 2011).

Although flow of growth medium improves nutrient and waste transport, shear stresses

induced by fluid flow could affect the scaffold architecture as well as cellular alignment

within the structures (Lawrence et al., 2009 as cited Gray et al., 1988; Huang et al., 2005).The

wall shear rate determines the hydrodynamic force, that adhering cells are exposed to,

which can be expressed per unit of area as the wall shear stress (in Pa), and is the product of

the wall shear rate and the kinematic viscosity of the fluid medium. The critical shear stress

for cell detachment has been found to range almost between 1 to 3 Pa that depends on the
1||the wall shear rate and the kinematic viscosity of the fluid medium. The critical shear stress

for cell detachment has been found to range almost between 1 to 3 Pa that depends on the

material on which the cells are cultured. Also the highest cell densities in the scaffolds could

be observed in the regions with larger pores, higher fluid flow velocities and higher wall

shear rates (Melchels et al., 2011 cited as Isenberg et al., 2006; Macario et al., 2008; Smith et

al., 1995).

It has been seen that the pore size is a variable strongly affecting the predicted shear stress

level, whereas the porosity only influence the statistical distribution of the shear stress

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 161

(Sadir, 2011). Furthermore, it has been showed that porosity and pore size affect pressure

drop which is important to be determined during tissue regeneration (Lawrence et al., 2009,
1||(Sadir, 2011). Furthermore, it has been showed that porosity and pore size affect pressure

drop which is important to be determined during tissue regeneration (Lawrence et al., 2009,

cited as Sodian et al., 2000). For the same pore size with decreasing porosities, pressure drop

increases, and for the constant porosity with reducing pore size, which could limit the fluid

flow and nutrient transport, pressure drop is increased (Sadir, 2011). Here these challenges

are investigated by the revision of two case studies.

3.1 Vascular system

The primary functions of blood vessels are the delivery of nutrients and oxygen to the

tissues and organs of the body and removal of their respective metabolites for clearance or

re-oxygenation (Boland et al., 2004). Diseases of the heart and blood vessels are the most life

threatening factor in developed countries (Ikada, 2006). Surgical replacement of vessel
1||re-oxygenation (Boland et al., 2004). Diseases of the heart and blood vessels are the most life

threatening factor in developed countries (Ikada, 2006). Surgical replacement of vessel

segments or bypass surgery is the most common intervention for coronary and peripheral

atherosclerotic disease with at least 550,000 bypass performed per year (Chung et al., 2010).

Autologous vessels harvested from the patient for bypass surgery include the saphenous

vein (SV) from the leg and the internal mammary artery (IMA) from the chest wall. The IMA

with elasticity maintains the ability to vasoregulate and is less prone to atherosclerosis (Wise

et al., 2011). Apart from the fact that implantation of native vessels is limited by the

mismatch of dimensional and mechanical properties (Chung et al., 2010), the acceptable vein

is not available in 30 %of patients (Boland et al., 2004).

An artery is composed of three layers having different matrix-tissue compositions. The
1||is not available in 30 %of patients (Boland et al., 2004).

An artery is composed of three layers having different matrix-tissue compositions. The

innermost lumen layer (intima) is composed of endothelial cells (ECs) on extracellular

matrixes such as type IV collagen and elastin, providing the necessary antithrombogenic

nature for contact with the bloodstream. The middle layer (media) is usually the thickest of

the three layers and is composed of multiple layers of smooth muscle cells (SMCs) within a

surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM) composed of collagen types I and III, elastin fibers

and various proteoglycans. The outermost layer (adventitia) is made of fibroblastic cells on

randomly arranged type I collagen. In short the collagens impart tensile strength to the

vessel wall while elastin provides the elasticity (Boland et al., 2004) (Thomas et al., 2007).

With respect to this construction, the combined structure is particularly attractive for
1||vessel wall while elastin provides the elasticity (Boland et al., 2004) (Thomas et al., 2007).

With respect to this construction, the combined structure is particularly attractive for

vascular tissue engineering applications. By designing a multilayered tube, it is now

possible to seed or co-culture different cell lines in layers with controlled orientation (Chung

et al., 2010).

Tissue engineering uses vascular cells and supporting scaffolds to build functional blood

vessels (Tillman et al., 2009). In the domain of cells, both the EC and SMC are critical

components of a tissue engineered vascular graft. ECs play an integral role in tissue

homeostasis, fibrinolysis, and anti-coagulation while SMCs perform many functions,

including vasoconstriction and dilatation, synthesis of various types of collagen, elastin and

proteoglycans (Ju et al., 2010). Bare scaffolds without ECs showed abundant platelet
1||including vasoconstriction and dilatation, synthesis of various types of collagen, elastin and

proteoglycans (Ju et al., 2010). Bare scaffolds without ECs showed abundant platelet

adherence, while scaffolds lined with ECs resisted adherence of blood elements. While it is

evident that cells play a major role in achieving patent vessels, designing a vascular

scaffolds that provide structural support, enabling cells to proliferate and growing into a

three-dimensional (3-D) tissue is important (Chung et al., 2010; Tillman et al., 2009)

Developing scaffolds that can withstand the pulsatile nature, high pressure, and high flow

rate of the bloodstream (Boland et al., 2004) is especially necessary in cardiovascular

applications. The ideal vascular prostheses must be a presentation of its functional

characters such as flexibility with kink resistance and biocompatibility (non-thrombogenic)

162 Biomaterials Science and Engineering
1||characters such as flexibility with kink resistance and biocompatibility (non-thrombogenic)

162 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

(Boland et al., 2004). Ability of ECs adherence to form an anti-thrombogenic luminal surface,

and SMCs migration, exhibit vasoactive properties, (Williamson et al., 2006 cited as Tiwari

et al., 2001; Seifalian et al., 2002), capability of withstanding physiological hemodynamic

forces while maintaining structural integrity until mature tissue forms in vivo (Ju et al.,

2010), and also the compliance is matched with that of the native artery (Boland et al., 2004).

Additionally, providing interconnected pores, generating high porosity so as to promote

cell–cell and cell–matrix communication and having sufficient mechanical stability are key

factors (Chung et al., 2010) for the engineering of blood vessels. Small pore size does not

bring about a problem for ECs but would limit the ability of SMCs to colonize the outer
1||factors (Chung et al., 2010) for the engineering of blood vessels. Small pore size does not

bring about a problem for ECs but would limit the ability of SMCs to colonize the outer

portion of neo- vessel. Several approaches have been proposed to generate large sized pores

which include the use of the salt leaching technique (Ju et al., 2010, cited as Nam et al., 2007)

and coelectrospinning with water-soluble polymers which serve as sacrificial fibers.

Researchers indicated that a larger pore size can be achieved by increasing the fiber

diameter and that this would facilitate cell infiltration. They showed that the mechanical

strength of the scaffolds decreases as fiber diameter increases (Ju et al., 2010).

Of the countless synthetic materials evaluated over the years, expanded poly tetrafluoro

ethylene (e-PTFE) and woven or knitted polyethylene terephthalate (PET) fibers have

proven to be satisfactory in terms of medium (6-10 mm internal diameter (ID)) and large
1||ethylene (e-PTFE) and woven or knitted polyethylene terephthalate (PET) fibers have

proven to be satisfactory in terms of medium (6-10 mm internal diameter (ID)) and large

(>10 mm ID) vascular prosthetics, respectively (Boland et al., 2004). However, clinical

success for small diameter (<6 mm) vessels has yet to be demonstrated due to complications

such as occlusion, thrombosis and intimal hyperplasia (Chung, 2010).

In addition, biodegradable synthetic polymer scaffolds from polyglycolic acid (PGA), poly-

L-lactic acid, polyhydroxyalkanoates such as poly-4-hydroxybutyrate, polycaprolactone -

copolylactic acid and polyethylene glycol have been explored. On the other hand, natural

polymers such as collagen and fibrin have also been utilized to construct biological vascular

grafts, populated and compacted by smooth muscle cells, and exhibiting high tensile

strength and flexibility (Zhang et al., 2008).
1||grafts, populated and compacted by smooth muscle cells, and exhibiting high tensile

strength and flexibility (Zhang et al., 2008).

However, future attempts are addressed as: (i) maufacture of scaffolds with ECM-like nano -

fibrous structure; (ii) development of the electrospun structures to manage pore size which

improves the ingrowth of large sized cells; (iii) test the structural integrity of these scaffolds

during degradation and under dynamic culture conditions (Vaz et al, 2005).

In some cases these materials have been coated with cell-adhesive proteins such as

fibronectin, vitronectin and laminin to facilitate EC attachment, which effectively renders

the surface to become antithrombogenic However, such modifications can also provide

good substrates for platelet adhesion and thrombus formation. EC must be able to resist

detachment by the high shear forces exerted by blood flow and turbulence, thereby
1||good substrates for platelet adhesion and thrombus formation. EC must be able to resist

detachment by the high shear forces exerted by blood flow and turbulence, thereby

providing an anti-thrombotic surface. They should also retain vasoactive function but not

induce immune reactions to the implant (Williamson et al., 2006, cited as Tiwari et al., 2001).

Based on these results, Ku and Park. suggested that Poly dopamine (PDA) coating generally

facilitates the cell adhesion process of culturing human umbilical vein endothelial cells

(HUVECs) on electrospun PCL nanofibers. The increase of cell adhesion on this coated

nanofibers are attributed to the adsorption/immobilization of serum proteins on PDA ad-

layer (Ku & Park, 2010).

As it was mentioned about vascular tissue construction, designing a multilayered tube is

attractive to seed or co- culture different cell lines in layers with controlled orientation. Vaz
1||As it was mentioned about vascular tissue construction, designing a multilayered tube is

attractive to seed or co- culture different cell lines in layers with controlled orientation. Vaz

et al. fabricated a bi- layered tubular scaffold of PLA (outer layer) and PCL (inner layer) by

multi-layering electrospinning (ME) using a rotating mandrel-type collector. The tensile

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 163

measurements showed that PLA/PCL scaffolds presented a much lower elongation and a

four-fold increase of maximum stress compared to electrospun PCL ones. The PLA/PCL bi-

layered scaffold supported the attachment, spread and growth of mouse fibroblasts (Vaz et

al, 2005).

Morever, Venugopal et al. proved that PCL nanofibrous matrixes coated with collagen

support cell growth or make the three-dimensional structured multilayer of PCL nanofibers

and collagen nanofibers suitable for blood vessel engineering. Their report defines the initial
1||support cell growth or make the three-dimensional structured multilayer of PCL nanofibers

and collagen nanofibers suitable for blood vessel engineering. Their report defines the initial

adhesion mechanism of SMCs to the sebiocompatible poly (caprolactone) nanofibrous

matrixes coated with collagen. These results may be relevant to other cell types (Venugopal

et al., 2005c).

Wise et al. reported the production of synthetic human elastin and poly caprolactone

multilayered vascular graft which mimics the mechanical properties of the human IMA.

They showed that conduits constructed from synthetic elastin (SE) alone had insufficient

strength for vascular applications. This graft was systematically modified by addition of

PCL, which was selected on the basis of its appropriate mechanical properties and a slow

degradation time. On the other hand, they found that PCL interacts with platelets, which
1||PCL, which was selected on the basis of its appropriate mechanical properties and a slow

degradation time. On the other hand, they found that PCL interacts with platelets, which

can contribute to thrombogenicity. For this reason, the graft lumen was made of pure SE i.e.

devoid of PCL to significantly reduce platelet adhesion, in contrast to PCL/collagen hybrids

which showed abundant platelet adherence. It should also be mentioned that the outer layer

of the graft, a hybrid of SE/PCL modulated the graft mechanic (Wise et al., 2011).

On the other hand, the nanolayer can mimic the ECM, whereas the micro layer provides

larger pores which facilitate superior cell infiltration; a micro - and nano-combined

structures can be advantageous.

Chung et al. combined electrospinning and melt spinning of poly (L-lactide-co-e-

caprolactone) (50:50 PLCL) to fabricate a multilayered tubular construct using a rotating
1||Chung et al. combined electrospinning and melt spinning of poly (L-lactide-co-e-

caprolactone) (50:50 PLCL) to fabricate a multilayered tubular construct using a rotating

mandrel for both techniques, which makes the nano layer able to adhere completely to the

micro layer. They showed that copolymers of PLCL exhibit a range of mechanical properties

from rigid solids to elastomers, depending on their composition. Furthermore, it has a slow

rate of degradation compared to other bioresorbable polymers such as PGA and PLA

(Chung et al., 2010).

Additionally, Surface patterns such as microgrooves have been successfully used to induce

both alignment of cell shape and directional cell migration. Uttayarat et al, incorporated

both electrospun microfibers and surface microgrooves in the fabrication of 3D synthetic

polyurethane (PU) grafts. They found that grooved patterns induced the uniform alignment
1||both electrospun microfibers and surface microgrooves in the fabrication of 3D synthetic

polyurethane (PU) grafts. They found that grooved patterns induced the uniform alignment

of endothelial cell monolayers with morphology similar to naturally aligned endothelium

under hemodynamic flow. They also extended these findings by demonstrating that a

groove depth or a fiber diameter of about 1 µm can guide the alignment of endothelial cells

inside tubular PU grafts (Uttayarat et al., 2010).

3.2 Nerve and spinal cord system

The nervous system is classified into the central nervous system (CNS) and the peripheral

nervous system (PNS). The CNS comprises the brain, spinal cord, optic, olfactory and

auditory systems. Considering these organs, the CNS comprises of a vast number of

neurons, astroglia, microglia, and oligodendrocytes.

The spinal cord which is approximately 1 cm thick and 42 cm long has four anatomical
1||neurons, astroglia, microglia, and oligodendrocytes.

The spinal cord which is approximately 1 cm thick and 42 cm long has four anatomical

divisions; the cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral regions. About 27 %of human spinal cord

injuries are lacerations caused by penetrating objects that tear the spinal tissue (Open

164 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

injuries) resulting in a discontinuity of the cord. The majority of the clinical cases are the

result of a temporary compression of the cord that leaves the cord surface intact (closed

injuries 73%). Three types of compression injuries are described: massive compression,

contusion, and solid cord injury (E.Schmidt et al., 2003; Erschbamer, 2007).

CNS axons do not regenerate appreciably in their native environment. Several glycoproteins

in the native extracellular environment (myelin) of the CNS are inhibitory for regeneration.

Regeneration in the adult CNS requires a multi-step process. First, the injured neuron must
1||in the native extracellular environment (myelin) of the CNS are inhibitory for regeneration.

Regeneration in the adult CNS requires a multi-step process. First, the injured neuron must

survive, and then the damaged axon must extend its cut processes to its original neuronal

targets. According to Horner and Gage investigation, once contact is made, the axon needs

to be re-myelinated and functional synapses need to form on the surface of the targeted

neurons (Horner and Gage., 2000).

In addition to the nerve graft and other natural tissues, such as autologous muscle and vein

grafts, biopolymers can be a practical tool to provide neurotrophic and/or cellular support

while simultaneously guiding axonal regeneration (Stokols et al., 2004; Rodriguez et al.,

2000). Indeed, numerous natural and synthetic polymers have been used as scaffolds or

within scaffolds for peripheral and central nerve regeneration.
1||2000). Indeed, numerous natural and synthetic polymers have been used as scaffolds or

within scaffolds for peripheral and central nerve regeneration.

Filling of the interior channels with appropriate cell facilitates axon regeneration. The Schwann

cell (SC) and its basal lamina are crucial components in the environment through which

regenerating axons grow to reach their peripheral targets. They produce myelin, which has

important effects on the speed of transmission of electrical signals and are shown to enhance

the regeneration of axons in both the peripheral and central nervous systems (Erschbamer,

2007; Alovskaya et al., 2007). Therefore, it seems that application of a nerve grafts (scaffolds)

coated with SCs can be an appropriate method for spinal cord regeneration.

Considering the requirements of scaffolds in general and in particular, i.e. in neural tissue

engineering, materials appropriate for SC seeding should posse some additional features. In
1||Considering the requirements of scaffolds in general and in particular, i.e. in neural tissue

engineering, materials appropriate for SC seeding should posse some additional features. In

order to successfully design a scaffold that can be used as treatment for SCI, many

considerations must be taken into account. The scaffold should lessen glial scar formation,

while containing sites for cell adhesion to allow regenerating neurons to extend axons into

the injury site (Willerth et al., 2007; Radulescu et al., 2007).

Among natural materials, Matin in 2004 found that implants coated with collagen are more

successful than the bare ones. Stokolos et al. chose to fabricate scaffolds with agarose for

several reasons. First, when implanted into lesion cavities in the spinal cord as an

unstructured solid agarose hydrogel, it did not evoke an immune or inflammatory response

and was stable for at least 1 month. Second, it was observed that neither axons nor cells
1||unstructured solid agarose hydrogel, it did not evoke an immune or inflammatory response

and was stable for at least 1 month. Second, it was observed that neither axons nor cells

penetrated solid agarose hydrogels, which suggested that walls composed of agarose could

effectively delineate pathways for regenerating axons. Third, freeze-drying could be used to

fabricate agarose into soft and flexible scaffold. Finally, neurotrophic factors, proven to elicit

robust axonal growth could be easily incorporated into these scaffolds.

In other researches, Alvskaya et al. described that by using fibronectin as a substrate in an in

vivo model of spinal cord repair, the growth of neuritis within the material is accompanied

by migration of SCs into the graft and the presence of reactive astrocytes at its surface

continued. Within the first 2 weeks of implantation, a number of cells and cellular elements
1||by migration of SCs into the graft and the presence of reactive astrocytes at its surface

continued. Within the first 2 weeks of implantation, a number of cells and cellular elements

replaced the FN mat as it dissolved. The first cells to infiltrate FN mats were macrophages.

The presence of integrin receptors on Schwann cells may be responsible for the extensive

infiltration of Schwann cells. The close spatial correspondence between laminin tubules and

Schwann cells suggests that they were deposited by the Schwann cells (Alovskaya et al.,

2007; King et al., 2006).

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 165

Along with natural materials, synthetic polymers have been widely used for tissue

engineering. Recently, Patist et al. demonstrated that the implantation of a macro porous

PLA tubular scaffold in the transected rat spinal cord elicited a modest axonal regeneration
1||engineering. Recently, Patist et al. demonstrated that the implantation of a macro porous

PLA tubular scaffold in the transected rat spinal cord elicited a modest axonal regeneration

response. These particular scaffolds were prepared by a thermally induced polymer-solvent

phase separation process and contained longitudinally oriented macropores connected to

each other by a network of micropores (Patist et al., 2004).

Moore et al. described multiple-channel, biodegradable scaffolds that serve as the basis for a

model to investigate simultaneously the effects of scaffold architecture, transplanted cells,

and locally delivered molecular agents on axon regeneration. PLGA with copolymer ratio

85:15 was used for their experiments. Primary neonatal Schwann cells were distributed in

the channels of the scaffold and remained viable in tissue culture for at least 48 h. Scaffolds

containing SCs implanted into transected adult rat spinal cords contained regenerating
1||the channels of the scaffold and remained viable in tissue culture for at least 48 h. Scaffolds

containing SCs implanted into transected adult rat spinal cords contained regenerating

axons at 1 month post-operation. Axon regeneration was demonstrated by three-

dimensional reconstruction of serial histological sections (Moore et al., 2006).

Also it is showed that PGS which have similar in vitro and in vivo biocompatibility to PLGA,

had no harmful effect on Schwann cell metabolic activity, attachment, or proliferation, and

did not induce apoptosis (Manzanedo, 2005; Sundback et al., 2005).

PHB has been previously used as a wrap-around implant to guide axonal growth after

peripheral nerve injury ( Ljungberg et al., 1999). Novikova et al. prepared a biodegradable

conduit made of PHB fibers which compressed together and running in parallel directions

in two perpendicular layers to form a sheet. Implantation of these PHB conduits coated with
1||conduit made of PHB fibers which compressed together and running in parallel directions

in two perpendicular layers to form a sheet. Implantation of these PHB conduits coated with

alginate hydrogel and fibronectin and seeded with SCs has been found to reduce spinal cord

cavitation as well as retrograde degeneration of injured spinal tract neurons (Novikov et al.,

2002).

PCL is interesting for the preparation of long term implantable devices, owing to its

degradation, which is even slower than that of polylactide. Schnell et al. designed

biodegradable, aligned poly-e-capro- lactone (PCL) and collagen/PCL (C/PCL) nanofibers

as guidance structures were produced by electrospinning and tested in cell culture assays.

They compared fibers of 100% PCL with fibers consisting of a 25:75% C/PCL blend. Both

types of electrospun fibers supported oriented neurite outgrowth and glial migration from

dorsal root ganglia (DRG) explants. SC migration, neurite orientation, and process
1||types of electrospun fibers supported oriented neurite outgrowth and glial migration from

dorsal root ganglia (DRG) explants. SC migration, neurite orientation, and process

formation of SCs, fibroblasts and olfactory ensheathing cells were improved on C/PCL

fibers, when compared to pure PCL fibers ( Schnell et al., 2007 ).

About PEG, it was showed that focal continuous application of this polymer has minimal

toxicity (Cole and Shi, 2005). Duerstock et al. used three- dimensional computer reconstructions

of PEG treated and spinal cords to determine whether the pathological character of a 1- month-

old injury is ameliorated by application of PEG. In PEG- treated animals, the lesion was more

focal and less diffuse throughout the damaged segment of the spinal cord, so that control

cords showed a significantly extended lesion surface area (Duerstock and Borgens, 2002).

Furthermore, a pHEMA scaffold could be easily incorporated into the nerve guidance tubes.
1||cords showed a significantly extended lesion surface area (Duerstock and Borgens, 2002).

Furthermore, a pHEMA scaffold could be easily incorporated into the nerve guidance tubes.

Flynn et al. developed a method to create longitude in ally oriented channels within

(pHEMA) hydrogels for neural tissue engineering applications. They found that these

scaffolds have the potential to enhance nerve regeneration after section injuries of the spinal

cord by increasing the available surface area and providing guidance to extending axons

and invading cells (Flynn et al., 2003).

Several techniques have been developed to process synthetic and natural scaffold materials

into porous structures as H. Tabesh et al. reviewed. Among these techniques, creating tissue

166 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

engineering scaffolds in nano-scale may bring unpredictable new properties to the material-

such as mechanical (stronger), physical (lighter), more porous (tunable),optical (color
1||engineering scaffolds in nano-scale may bring unpredictable new properties to the material-

such as mechanical (stronger), physical (lighter), more porous (tunable),optical (color

emission), chemical reactivity (more active and less corrosive), electronic properties (more

electrically conductive),and magnetic properties (super paramagnetic which are very

important in nerve regeneration). Such scaffolds may come up with new functionalities as

well-which are unavailable at micro or macro scales (Tabesh et al., 2009).

The process of electrospinning is used for nano-fibrous scaffold fabrication. Electrospinning

can even be used to create biocompatible thin films with useful coating designs and surface

structures that can be deposited on implantable devices inorder to facilitate the integration

of these devices with the body. Silk-like polymers with fibronectin have been electrospun to

make biocompatible films used on prosthetic devices aimed to be implanted in the central
1||of these devices with the body. Silk-like polymers with fibronectin have been electrospun to

make biocompatible films used on prosthetic devices aimed to be implanted in the central

nervous system (Buchko et al., 1999).

Moreover, an elegant way to produce nanofibrous scaffold using PLLA by a liquid–liquid

phase separation method quite similar to natural extracellular matrix (ECM) was developed

by a group of scientists. They showed its efficacy in supporting the neural stem cell (NSC)

differentiation and neurite outgrowth (Yang et al., 2004).

In addition, a new and facile method for the creation of longitudinally oriented channels in

pHEMA gels using a fiber templating technique was described. Biodegradable

polycaprolactone (PCL) fibers were extruded and embedded in transparent pHEMA gels,

leading to the creation of a pHEMA–PCL composite.

4. Conclusion

In this chapter, efficacious biomaterials (natural and synthetic) for scaffolds in tissue
1||leading to the creation of a pHEMA–PCL composite.

4. Conclusion

In this chapter, efficacious biomaterials (natural and synthetic) for scaffolds in tissue

engineering and cell seeding were discussed and also techniques to their fabrication were

reviewed. Considering results using such materials and the mentioned criteria for an

appropriate scaffold, it is proved that the selection of materials and method of fabrication

depend on the cells and their characteristics. The reasons are: scaffold candidates should

mimic the structure and biological activity of the native ECM proteins which provide

adequate mechanical support and regulate cellular activates. In addition, scaffolds must

support and define the three-dimensional structure of the tissue engineered space and

maintain the normal state of differentiation within the cellular compartment.

Furthermore the structure of scaffold, pore size and porosity, may affect the mass transfer,
1||maintain the normal state of differentiation within the cellular compartment.

Furthermore the structure of scaffold, pore size and porosity, may affect the mass transfer,

shear rate and pressure drop. Mass transfer is the major hindrance in tissue engineering.

Although surface area to volume ratios of a scaffold can decrease mass transfer limitations,

it is still one of the greatest challenge in tissue engineering. It has been observed that the

pore size and shape influence the shear stress level and distribution, while the porosity

affects only the distribution. Therefore the wall shear stress is an important parameter in cell

adhesion processes.

Two case studies, blood and nerve systems, with regard to their challenges have been

investigated. First, for blood system, a scaffold must have the function of native blood and

must provide appropriate mechanical, endothelialization and antithrombogenic properties.
1||investigated. First, for blood system, a scaffold must have the function of native blood and

must provide appropriate mechanical, endothelialization and antithrombogenic properties.

Therefore choosing a proper biomaterial which provides these characters is prominent. With

respect to multilayered construction of blood vessels, the combined structure is particularly

attractive for vascular tissue engineering applications. For a better simulation, various types

of materials and cells have been used to form different layers of this tissue.

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 167

Secondly, for nerve regeneration, it is suggested that blending a synthetic and natural

polymer (e.g. poly-e-caprolactone and collagen) is the best choice for Schwann cell seeding

to regenerate the spinal cord injuries, considering all results using different materials and

the mentioned criteria for an appropriate scaffold. The two suggested polymers have the
1||to regenerate the spinal cord injuries, considering all results using different materials and

the mentioned criteria for an appropriate scaffold. The two suggested polymers have the

potential to play role of a scaffold in SCs seeding.

Collagen is a protein of ECM and exists in the basal membrane of the cell. It is easily

purified, which can be proposed as a proper substance; however, collagen has less strength

to withstand long time, support force adhesion, and degrades enzymatically within short

periods. Therefore, using another polymer such as PCL to enhance the stability and

mechanical strength of collagen would be crucial. In this sence, an excellent scaffold for

Schwann cell adhesion, migration, orientation, and proliferation can be provided.

Also electrospinning is considered as the excellent method for the fabrication of such

scaffolds. Additionally, electrospun nanofibers exhibit excellent supports for nerve growth
1||Also electrospinning is considered as the excellent method for the fabrication of such

scaffolds. Additionally, electrospun nanofibers exhibit excellent supports for nerve growth

because they can provide large surface area to volume ratios, pore sizes tailored to Schwann

cells dimensions, functionalized surfaces, and multiple sites for interaction and attachment,

and low mass transfer limitation.

5. References

Alovskaya A.; Alekseeva T.; Phillips J.B.; King V. & Brown R. (2007). Fibronectin, Collagen,

Fibrin - Components of Extracellular Matrix for Nerve regeneration. In: Topics in

Tissue Engineerin, Vol. 3, Ashammakhi Eds.N.; Reis R.L. & Ciellini E. <

http://www.oulu.fi/spareparts/ebook_topics_in_t_e_vol3/list_of_contr.html>

Boland E.D.; Matthews J.A.; Pawlowski K.J.; Simpson D.G.; Wnek G.E. & Bowlin G.L. (2004).

Electrospinning collagen and elastin: preliminary vascular tissue engineering,

Frontiers in Bioscience, Vol. 9, 1422-1432.
1||Electrospinning collagen and elastin: preliminary vascular tissue engineering,

Frontiers in Bioscience, Vol. 9, 1422-1432.

Bowlin G.L.; Matthews J.A.; Simpson D.G.; Kenawy E.R. & Wnek G.E. (2001).

Electrospinning biomaterials. Journal of Textile Apparel, Technol Manage, Vol. 1,

Special issue: The Fiber Society, Spring 2001 Conference, Raleigh NC.

Buchko C.J.; Chen L.C.; Shen Y. & Martin D.C. (1999). Processing and microstructural

characterization of porous biocompatible protein thin films. Polymer, Vol. 40, No.

26, pp. 7397-7407.

Chunlin Y.; Hillas P.J.; Buez J.A.; Nokelainen M.; Balan J.; Tang, J.; Spiro R. & Polarek J.W.

(2004). The application of recombinant human collagen in tissue engineering,

BioDrugs, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 103_119.

Chung S.; Ingle N. P.; Montero G.A.; Kim S.H. & King M.W. (2010). Bioresorbable

elastomeric vascular tissue engineering scaffolds via melt spinning and

electrospinning, Acta Biomaterialia, Vol. 6, No. 6, pp. 1958–1967, ISSN 1742-7061
1||elastomeric vascular tissue engineering scaffolds via melt spinning and

electrospinning, Acta Biomaterialia, Vol. 6, No. 6, pp. 1958–1967, ISSN 1742-7061

Cole A. & Shi R. (2005). Prolonged focal application of polyethylene glycol induces

conduction block in guinea pig spinal cord white matter. Toxicology in Vitro, Vol. 19,

No. 2, pp. 215-220.

Cuy J. (2004). Biomaterials Tutorial: Natural Polymers. University of Washington

Engineered Biomaterials. < http://www.uweb.engr.washington.edu/>

168 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

Duerstock B. & Borgens R. (2002). Three-dimensional morphometry of spinal cord injury

following polyethylene glycol treatment. The Journal of Experimental Biology. Vol.

205 (pt 1), pp. 13-24.

Ebner R.; Lackner J.M.; Waldhauser W.; Major R.; Czarnowska E.; Kustosz R.; Lacki P. &

Major B. (2006). Biocompatible TiN-based novel nanocrystalline films, Bulletin of the

polish academy of science, Vol. 54, No. 2, pp. 167-173.
1||Major B. (2006). Biocompatible TiN-based novel nanocrystalline films, Bulletin of the

polish academy of science, Vol. 54, No. 2, pp. 167-173.

Ellis M.; Jarman-Smith M. & Chaudhuri JB. (2005). Bioreactor Systems for Tissue

Engineering: A Four-Dimensional Challenge, In: Bioreactors for Tissue Engineering:

Principles, Design and Operation, Al-Rubeai M. & Chaudhuri JB., pp. 1–18, Springer,

<http://www.springer.com/biomed/book/978-1-4020-3740-5>

Elmstedt N. (2006). Development of biosynthetic conduit for spinal cord and peripheral

nerve injury repair, in vitro study. Thesis. Stockholm, Sweden. <

http://www.nada.kth.se/utbildning/grukth/exjobb/rapportlistor/2006/>

Erschbamer M. (2007). Experimental spinal cord injury: Development of protection and

repair strategies in rats. Thesis. Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet,

Stockholm, Sweden. < http://publications.ki.se/jspui/handle/10616/39259 >
1||repair strategies in rats. Thesis. Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet,

Stockholm, Sweden. < http://publications.ki.se/jspui/handle/10616/39259 >

E.Schmidt Ch. & Baier Leach J. (2003). Neural tissue engineering: strategies for repair and

regeneration. Annual review of Biomedical Engineering. Vol. 5, pp. 293-347.

Fang D.; Xong X.; Chen W.; Cruz S.; Hsiao B. & Chu B. (2001). Nanostructured electrospun

poly-D,L-lactideco-glycolide membranes for anti-adhesion applications. Apparel

Technol, Vol. 1, Special issue: The Fiber Society, Spring 2001 Conference, Raleigh

NC.

Flynn L.; Dalton P.D. & Shoichet M.S. (2003). Fiber templating of poly(2-hydroxyethyl

methacrylate) for neural tissue engineering. Biomaterials, Vol. 24, No. 23, pp. 4265-

4272.

Friedman J.A.; Windebank A.J.; Moore M.J.; Spinner R.J.; Currier B.L.; Yaszemski M.I.;

Bartolomei J.; Piepmeier J.M.; GHU G.; Fehlings M.G.; Hodge Ch.J. & Wagner F.C.
1||4272.

Friedman J.A.; Windebank A.J.; Moore M.J.; Spinner R.J.; Currier B.L.; Yaszemski M.I.;

Bartolomei J.; Piepmeier J.M.; GHU G.; Fehlings M.G.; Hodge Ch.J. & Wagner F.C.

(2002). Biodegradable polymer grafts for surgical repair of the injured spinal cord.

Neurosurgery, Vol. 51, No. 3, pp. 742-52.

Griffith L. G. & Naughton G. (2002). Tissue engineering–current challenges and expanding

opportunities. Science, Vol. 295, No. 5557, pp. 1009-1014.

Horner P. & Gage F. (2000). Regenerating the damaged central nervous system. Nature, Vol.

407, pp. 963-970.

Hurtado A.; Moon L.D.; Maquet V.; Blits B.; Jerome R. & Oudega M. (2006). Poly (D,L-lactic

acid) macroporous guidance scaffolds seeded with Schwann cells genetically

modified to secrete a bi-functional neurotrophin implanted in the completely

transected adult rat thoracic spinal cord. Biomaterials, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 430-442.

Ikada Y. (2006). Challenges in tissue engineering, Journal of Technology Society Interface, Vol.
1||transected adult rat thoracic spinal cord. Biomaterials, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 430-442.

Ikada Y. (2006). Challenges in tissue engineering, Journal of Technology Society Interface, Vol.

3, pp. 589–601

Ju Y.M.; Choi J.S.; Atala A.; Yoo J.J. & Lee S. J. (2010). Bilayered scaffold for engineering

cellularized blood vessels, Biomaterials, Vol. 31, No. 15, pp. 4313–4321, ISSN: 0142-

9612

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 169

Ljungberg C.; Johansson-Ruden G.; Bostrom K.J.; Novikov L. & Wiberg, M. (1999). Neuronal

Survival Using a Resorbable Synthetic conduit as an Alternative to Primary Nerve

Repair, Microsurgery, Vol. 19, No. 6, pp. 259_264.

Kannan RY.; Salacinski HJ.; Sales K.; Butler P. & Seifalian A.M. (2005). The roles of tissue

engineering and vascularisation in the development of micro-vascular networks: a

review. Biomaterials, Vol. 26, No. 14, pp. 1857-1875.
1||engineering and vascularisation in the development of micro-vascular networks: a

review. Biomaterials, Vol. 26, No. 14, pp. 1857-1875.

King V.R.; Henseler M.; Hunt-Grubbe H.; Brown R. & Priestly J.V. (2006). Cellular and

extracellular infiltrates into fibronectin mats implanted into the damaged adult rat

spinal cord. Biomaterials, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 485-496.

Khor E. & Lim L.Y. (2003). Implantable applications of chitin and chitosan, Biomaterials, Vol.

24, No. 13, pp. 2339_2349.

Kricheldorf H. R. (2001). syntheses and application of polylactides. Chemosphere, Vol. 43, No.

1, pp. 49-54.

Ku S. H. & Park Ch.B. (2010). Human endothelial cell growth on mussel-inspired nanofiber

scaffold for vascular tissue engineering, Biomaterials, vol. 31, No. 36, pp. 9431-9437,

ISSN: 0142-9612

Lawrence B. J., Devarapalli M. & Madihally S.V. (2009). Flow Dynamics in Bioreactors

Containing Tissue Engineering Scaffolds, Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Vol. 102,

No. 3, pp. 935-947.
1||Lawrence B. J., Devarapalli M. & Madihally S.V. (2009). Flow Dynamics in Bioreactors

Containing Tissue Engineering Scaffolds, Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Vol. 102,

No. 3, pp. 935-947.

Liu W. & Cao Y. (2007). Application of scaffold materials in tissue reconstruction in

immunocompetent mammals: our experience and future requirements, Biomaterials,

Vol. 28, No. 34, pp. 5078–5086.

Madihally S.V. & Matthew H.W.T. (1999). Porous chitosan scaffolds for tissue engineering,

Biomaterials, Vol. 20, No. 12, pp. 1133_1142.

Manzanedo D. (2005). Biorubber (PGS): evaluation of a novel biodegradable elastomers.

Thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Materials Science and

Engineering. < http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/37687>

Martins A.; Araújo J.V.; Reis R.L. & Neves N.M. (2007). Electrospun nanostructured

scaffolds for tissue engineering applications. Nanomedicine, Vol. 2, No. 6, pp. 929-42.
1||Martins A.; Araújo J.V.; Reis R.L. & Neves N.M. (2007). Electrospun nanostructured

scaffolds for tissue engineering applications. Nanomedicine, Vol. 2, No. 6, pp. 929-42.

Matin S. (2004). Spinal cord regeneration via collagen entubulation. Thesis. Department of

Aeronautics and Astronautics, John Hopkins University, Massachuset Institute of

Technology. < http://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/28889>

Melchels F. P.W.; Tonnarelli B.; Olivares A.L.; Martin I.; Lacroix D.; Feijen J.; Wendt D. J. &

Grijpma D. W. (2011) . The influence of the scaffold design on the distribution of

adhering cells after perfusion cell seeding, Biomaterials, Vol. 32, No. 11, pp. 2878-

2884, ISSN: 0142-9612

Mikos A. & Temenoff J. (2003). Formation of highly porous biodegradable scaffolds for

tissue engineering. EJB Electronic Journal of Biotechnology, Vol.3 No.2, ( August 15,

2000), ISSN: 0717-3458

Mohd nasir N.F.; mohd zain N.; Graha M. & kardi N.A. (2005). characterization of chitosan –
1||2000), ISSN: 0717-3458

Mohd nasir N.F.; mohd zain N.; Graha M. & kardi N.A. (2005). characterization of chitosan –

(poly ethylene oxide) blend as haemodiyalysis membrane, American journal of

applied science, Vol. 2, No. 12, pp. 1578-1583.

170 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

Mosahebi. Mohammadi., 2001. Genetic Labelling and Transplantation of Schwann cells to

Enhance Pheripheral Nerve Regeneration, Royal Free & University College Medical

School, University of London.

Moore M.; Friedmanb J.; Lewellync E.; Mantilaa S.; Krychd A.; Ameenuddinc S.; Knightc Lu

L.; Currierd B.; Spinnerd R.; Marshd R.; Windebank A. & Yaszemskia M. (2006).

Multiple-channel scaffolds to promote spinal cord axon regeneration. Biomaterials,

Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 419-429.

Onose G.; Ciureaa A.V.; Rizeaa R.E.; Chendreanu C.; Anghelescu A.; Haras M. & Brehar F.

(2008). Recent advancements in biomaterials for spinal cord injury complex
1||Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 419-429.

Onose G.; Ciureaa A.V.; Rizeaa R.E.; Chendreanu C.; Anghelescu A.; Haras M. & Brehar F.

(2008). Recent advancements in biomaterials for spinal cord injury complex

therapeutics. Digest Journal of Nanomaterials and Biostructures, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 307-

314.

Patist C.M.; Mulder M.B.; Gautier S.E.; Maquet V.; Jerome R. & Oudeg M. (2004). Freeze-

dried poly (D,L-lactic acid) macroporous guidance scaffolds impregnated with

brain-derived neurotrophic factor in the transected adult rat thoracic spinal cord.

Biomaterials, Vol. 25, No. 9, pp. 1569-82.

Pörtner R.; Nagel-Heyer S.; Goepfert Ch.; Adamietz P. & Meenen M. N. (2005). Bioreactor

Design for Tissue Engineering. Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Vol. 100, No.

3, pp. 235-245, ISSN: 1389-1723.

Radulescu D.; Dhar S.; Young Ch.; Taylor D.; Trost H.; Hayes D. & Evans G. (2007). Tissue

engineering scaffolds for nerve regeneration manufactured by ink-jet technology,
1||Radulescu D.; Dhar S.; Young Ch.; Taylor D.; Trost H.; Hayes D. & Evans G. (2007). Tissue

engineering scaffolds for nerve regeneration manufactured by ink-jet technology,

Materials Science and Engineering: C, Vol. 27, No. 3, pp. 534–539.

Reed A.M. & Gilding D. k.; (1981). Biodegradable Polymers For Use in Surgery Poly (lactic

acid)/Ploy(glycolic)Homo and Copolymers:2.In vitro Degradation, Polymer, Vol.

22, pp. 494_498.

Rho K.; Jeong L.; Lee G.; Seo B.; Park Y.; Hong S.; Roh S.; Cho J.; Park W. & Min B. (2006).

Electrospinning of collagen nanofibers: Effects on the behavior of normal human

keratinocytes and early-stage wound healing. Biomaterials, Vol. 27, No. 8, pp. 1452-

1461

Rodriguez F.; Verdu E.; Ceballos D. & Navarro X. (2000). Nerve Guides seeded with

autologous Schwann cells Improve Nerve Regeneration, Experimental Neurology,

Vol. 161, No. 2, pp. 571-584.

Sachlos E. & Czernuszka J.T. (2003). Making tissue engineering scaffolds work Review on
1||autologous Schwann cells Improve Nerve Regeneration, Experimental Neurology,

Vol. 161, No. 2, pp. 571-584.

Sachlos E. & Czernuszka J.T. (2003). Making tissue engineering scaffolds work Review on

the application of solid freeform fabrication technology to the production of tissue

engineering scaffolds. European Cells and Materials, Vol. 5, pp. 29-40, ISSN: 1473-

2262.

Sadir S.; Kadir M.R.A.; Öchsner A. & Harun M.N. (2011). Modeling of Bio Scaffolds:

Structural and Fluid

Transport Characterization, World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, Vol. 74,

pp. 621-627.

Schnell E.; Klinkhammer K.; Balzer S.; Brook G.; Klee D. & Dalton P. (2007). Guidance of

glial cell migration and axonal growth on electrospun nanofibers of poly-e-

caprolactone and a collagen/poly-e-caprolactone blend, Biomaterials, Vol. 28, No.

19, pp. 3012-3025.

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 171
1||caprolactone and a collagen/poly-e-caprolactone blend, Biomaterials, Vol. 28, No.

19, pp. 3012-3025.

The Role of Biodegradable Engineered Scaffold in Tissue Engineering 171

Sengers B.G.; Taylor M.P.; Please COC. & Oreffo R. (2007). Computational modelling of cell

spreading and tissue regeneration in porous scaffolds. Biomaterials, Vol. 28, No. 10,

pp. 1926–1940.

Stokols Sh. & Tuszynski M. (2004). The fabrication and characterization of linearly oriented

nerve guidance scaffolds for spinal cord injury. Biomaterials, Vol. 25, No. 27, pp.

5839-5846.

Sundback C.A.; Shyn J.Y.; Wang Y.; Faquin W.C.; Langer R.S.; Vacanti, J.P. & Hadlock T.S.

(2005). Biocompability analysis of a poly(glycerol sebacate) as a nerve guide

material. Biomaterials, Vol. 26, No. 27, pp. 5454-5464.

Tabesh H.; Amoabediny Gh.; Salehi-Nik N.; Heydari M.; Yosefifard M.; Ranaei Siadat S.O. &

Mottaghy K. (2009). The role of biodegradable engineered scaffolds seeded with
1||Tabesh H.; Amoabediny Gh.; Salehi-Nik N.; Heydari M.; Yosefifard M.; Ranaei Siadat S.O. &

Mottaghy K. (2009). The role of biodegradable engineered scaffolds seeded with

Schwann cells for spinal cord regeneration. Neurochemistry international, Vol. 53, No.

2, pp. 73–83, ISSN: 0197-0186

Tillman B.W.; Yazdani S.K.; Lee S.J.; Geary R.L.; Atala A. & Yoo J.J. (2009). The in vivo

stability of electrospun polycaprolactone-collagen scaffolds in vascular

reconstruction, Biomaterials, Vol. 30, No. 4, pp. 583–588, ISSN: 0142-9612.

Thomas V.; Zhang X.; Catledge Sh.A & Vohra Y.K. (2007). Functionally graded electrospun

scaffolds with tunable mechanical properties for vascular tissue regeneration,

Biomedical Materials, Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 224–232, ISSN: 1748-6041.

Uttayarat P.; Perets A.; Li M.; Pimton P.; Stachelek S.J.; Alferiev I.; Composto R.J.; Levy R.J.

& Lelkes P.I. (2010). Micropatterning of three-dimensional electrospun
1||Uttayarat P.; Perets A.; Li M.; Pimton P.; Stachelek S.J.; Alferiev I.; Composto R.J.; Levy R.J.

& Lelkes P.I. (2010). Micropatterning of three-dimensional electrospun

polyurethane vascular grafts, Acta Biomaterialia, Vol. 6, No. 11, pp. 4229–4237, ISSN

1742-7061

Vaz C.M.; Tuijl S. V.; Bouten C.V.C. & Baaijens F.P.T. (2005). Design of scaffolds for blood

vessel tissue engineering using a multi-layering electrospinning technique, Acta

Biomaterialia, Vol. 1, No. 5, pp. 575–582, ISSN 1742-7061

Venugopal, J.; Zhang Y.Z. & Ramakrishna S. (2005a). Fabrication of modified and

functionalized polycaprolactone nanofibre scaffolds for vascular tissue engineering.

Nanotechnology, Vol. 16, No. 10, pp. 2138-2142.

Venugopal J.; Zhang Y. & Ramakrishna S. (2005b). Electrospun nanofibres: biomedical

applications. IMechE, Vol. 218, No. 1, pp. 35-45.

Venugopal J.; Zhang Y. & Ramakrishna S. (2005c). In vitro study of smooth muscle cells on
1||applications. IMechE, Vol. 218, No. 1, pp. 35-45.

Venugopal J.; Zhang Y. & Ramakrishna S. (2005c). In vitro study of smooth muscle cells on

polycaprolactone and collagen nanofibrous matrices. Cell Biology International, Vol.

25, No. 10, pp. 861-867.

Willerth S. & Sakayama-Elbert Sh. (2007). Approaches to neural tissue engineering using

scaffolds for drug delivery, Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, Vol. 59, No. 4-5, pp.

325–338.

Wise S.G.; Byrom M.J.; Waterhouse A.; Bannon P.G.; Ng M.K.C. & Weiss A.S. (2011) A

multilayered synthetic human elastin/polycaprolactone hybrid vascular graft with

tailored mechanical properties, Acta Biomaterialia, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 295–303, ISSN

1742-7061

Williamson M. R.; Black R. & Kielty C. (2006). PCL–PU composite vascular scaffold

production for vascular tissue engineering: Attachment, proliferation and

172 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

bioactivity of human vascular endothelial cells, Biomaterials, Vol. 27, No. 19, pp.
1||172 Biomaterials Science and Engineering

bioactivity of human vascular endothelial cells, Biomaterials, Vol. 27, No. 19, pp.

3608–3616, ISSN: 0142-9612

Yang L.; Fitie´ C.; van der Werf K.; Bennink M.; Dijkstra P. & Feijen J. (2008). Mechanical

properties of single electrospun collagen type I fibers. Biomaterials, Vol. 29, No. 8,

pp. 955-962.

Yarlagadda PK..; Chandrasekharan M. & Shyan JY. (2005). Recent advances and current

developments in tissue scaffolding, Bio-Medical Materials and Engineering, Vol. 15,

No. 3, pp. 159–177.

Zhang X.; Baughman C.B. & Kaplan D.L. (2008). In vitro evaluation of electrospun silk

fibroin scaffolds for vascular cell growth, Biomaterials, Vol. 29, No. 14, pp. 2217-

2227, ISSN: 0142-9612
